One of the most
common issues you
still counter when you try
to train large language models
is running out of memory.
If you've ever tried
training or even
just loading your
model on Nvidia GPUs,
this error message
might look familiar.
CUDA, short for Compute
Unified Device Architecture,
is a collection of libraries and
tools developed for Nvidia GPUs.
Libraries such as PyTorch and
TensorFlow use CUDA to boost
performance on metrics
multiplication
and other operations
common to deep learning.
You'll encounter these
out-of-memory issues
because most LLMs are huge,
and require a ton of memory to
store and train all
of their parameters.
Let's do some quick
math to develop
intuition about the
scale of the problem.
A single parameter is typically
represented by a 32-bit float,
which is a way computers
represent real numbers.
You'll see more
details about how
numbers gets stored in
this format shortly.
A 32-bit float takes up
four bytes of memory.
So to store one billion
parameters you'll need
four bytes times one
billion parameters,
or four gigabyte of GPU RAM
at 32-bit full precision.
This is a lot of
memory, and note,
if only accounted for
the memory to store the
model weights so far.
If you want to train the model,
you'll have to plan for
additional components that use
GPU memory during training.
These include two Adam
optimizer states,
gradients, activations,
and temporary variables
needed by your functions.
This can easily lead to
20 extra bytes of memory
per model parameter.
In fact, to account for
all of these overhead
during training,
you'll actually require
approximately 20 times the amount
of GPU RAM that the model
weights alone take up.
To train a one billion
parameter model
at 32-bit full precision,
you'll need approximately
80 gigabyte of GPU RAM.
This is definitely too large
for consumer hardware,
and even challenging for
hardware used in data centers,
if you want to train
with a single processor.
Eighty gigabyte is
the memory capacity
of a single Nvidia A100 GPU,
a common processor used for
machine learning
tasks in the Cloud.
What options do you have to
reduce the memory
required for training?
One technique that
you can use to
reduce the memory is
called quantization.
The main idea here is that you
reduce the memory required
to store the weights
of your model by reducing
their precision from
32-bit floating point numbers
to 16-bit floating
point numbers,
or eight-bit integer numbers.
The corresponding data types
used in deep learning
frameworks and
libraries are FP32 for
32-bit full position,
FP16, or Bfloat16 for
16-bit half precision,
and int8 eight-bit integers.
The range of numbers
you can represent
with FP32 goes from
approximately
3*10^-38 to 3*10^38.
By default, model
weights, activations,
and other model parameters
are stored in FP32.
Quantization
statistically projects
the original 32-bit
floating point numbers
into a lower precision space,
using scaling factors
calculated based on
the range of the original
32-bit floating point numbers.
Let's look at an example.
Suppose you want
to store a PI to
six decimal places in
different positions.
Floating point
numbers are stored as
a series of bits zeros and ones.
The 32 bits to store numbers in
full precision with FP32 consist
of one bit for
the sign where zero
indicates a positive number,
and one a negative number.
Then eight bits for the
exponent of the number,
and 23 bits representing
the fraction of the number.
The fraction is
also referred to as
the mantissa, or significant.
It represents the precision
bits off the number.
If you convert the 32-bit
floating point value
back to a decimal value,
you notice the slight
loss in precision.
For reference, here's
the real value of
Pi to 19 decimal places.
Now, let's see what
happens if you project
this FP32 representation
of Pi into the FP16,
16-bit lower precision space.
The 16 bits consists of
one bit for the sign,
as you saw for FP32,
but now FP16 only
assigns five bits to
represent the exponent and
10 bits to represent
the fraction.
Therefore, the range
of numbers you can
represent with FP16 is vastly
smaller from negative
65,504 to positive 65,504.
The original FP32 value
gets projected to
3.140625 in the 16-bit space.
Notice that you lose some
precision with this projection.
There are only six places
after the decimal point now.
You'll find that this loss in
precision is acceptable in
most cases because you're trying
to optimize for
memory footprint.
Storing a value in FP32
requires four bytes of memory.
In contrast, storing a value on
FP16 requires only
two bytes of memory,
so with quantization you have
reduced the memory
requirement by half.
The AI research
community has explored
ways to optimize16-bit
quantization.
One datatype in
particular BFLOAT16,
has recently become a
popular alternative to FP16.
BFLOAT16, short for Brain
Floating Point Format
developed at Google Brain
has become a popular
choice in deep learning.
Many LLMs, including FLAN-T5,
have been pre-trained
with BFLOAT16.
BFLOAT16 or BF16 is a hybrid
between half precision FP16
and full precision FP32.
BF16 significantly helps with
training stability
and is supported
by newer GPU's such
as NVIDIA's A100.
BFLOAT16 is often described
as a truncated 32-bit float,
as it captures the
full dynamic range
of the full 32-bit float,
that uses only 16-bits.
BFLOAT16 uses the
full eight bits
to represent the exponent,
but truncates the fraction
to just seven bits.
This not only saves memory,
but also increases
model performance
by speeding up calculations.
The downside is that BF16
is not well suited for
integer calculations,
but these are relatively
rare in deep learning.
For completeness
let's have a look at
what happens if you quantize
Pi from the 32-bit into
the even lower precision
eight bit space.
If you use one bit for the sign
INT8 values are represented
by the remaining seven bits.
This gives you a range to
represent numbers from
negative 128 to positive
127 and unsurprisingly Pi gets
projected two or three
in the 8-bit lower
precision space.
This brings new memory
requirement down from
originally four bytes
to just one byte,
but obviously results in
a pretty dramatic
loss of precision.
Let's summarize what
you've learned here and
emphasize the key points you
should take away from
this discussion.
Remember that the
goal of quantization
is to reduce the
memory required to
store and train models by
reducing the precision
off the model weights.
Quantization
statistically projects
the original 32-bit
floating point numbers into
lower precision spaces
using scaling factors
calculated based on the range
of the original 32-bit floats.
Modern deep learning
frameworks and
libraries support
quantization-aware training,
which learns the quantization
scaling factors during
the training process.
The details of this process
are beyond the scope
of this course.
But you've seen the
key point here,
that you can use
quantization to reduce
the memory footprint off
the model during training.
BFLOAT16 has become a
popular choice of precision
in deep learning as it
maintains the dynamic
range of FP32,
but reduces the memory
footprint by half.
Many LLMs, including FLAN-T5,
have been pre-trained
with BFOLAT16.
Lookout for a mention of
BFLOAT16 in next week's lab.
Now let's return to the
challenge of fitting models into
GPU memory and take a look
at the impact
quantization can have.
By applying
quantization, you can
reduce your memory
consumption required to
store the model
parameters down to
only two gigabyte using
16-bit half precision of
50% saving and you
could further reduce
the memory footprint by
another 50% by representing
the model parameters
as eight bit integers,
which requires only one
gigabyte of GPU RAM.
Note that in all
these cases you still
have a model with one
billion parameters.
As you can see, the circles
representing the models
are the same size.
Quantization will give you
the same degree of savings
when it comes to training.
As you heard earlier, you'll
quickly hit the limit of
a single NVIDIA A100 GPU
with 80 gigabytes of memory.
When you try to train
a one billion parameter model
at 32-bit full precision,
you'll need to consider using
either 16-bit or eight
bit quantization if
you want to train on a
single GPU and remember,
many models now have
sizes in excess of
50 billion or even 100
billion parameters.
Meaning you'd need up to
500 times more memory
capacity to train them,
tens of thousands of gigabytes.
These enormous models dwarf
the one billion parameter
model we've been considering,
shown here to scale on the left.
As modal scale beyond a
few billion parameters,
it becomes impossible to
train them on a single GPU.
Instead, you'll need to turn to
distributed computing
techniques while you
train your model
across multiple GPUs.
This could require access
to hundreds of GPUs,
which is very expensive.
Another reason why
you won't pre-train
your own model from
scratch most of the time.
However, an additional
training process
called fine-tuning,
which you'll learn
about next week.
Also require storing all
training parameters in
memory and it's very likely
you'll want to fine tune
a model at some point.
To help you
understand more about
the technical aspects of
training across GPUs,
we've prepared an
optional video for you.
It's very detailed, but it will
help you understand some of
the options that
exist for developers
like you to train larger models.
You should feel free
to skip this video.
But if you're interested
in learning more,
I hope you'll check it out.